## Lily’s Story

##### Lily

  

  Chapter 11 Could it Have Been Me?

  

2015-02-09 07:37:53

China has the world’s largest population. With such a large base, even a small
percentage will result in large numbers. This is what you read about. It IS
possible for women to rise up, but she has to work a lot harder than men. She
must be willing to “give”, and follow the “hidden rules.”

  

2015-02-09 07:53:58

People almost seemed relieved that a woman who had short cuts to the top of
society was finally being meted the justice owed her.

  

2015-02-09 07:57:32

had heard of the term “daughters raised in luxury” before. Some Chinese
parents believe that rich or poor, they must raise their daughters in luxury
so they would be less likely tempted by the luxury offered by men.

  

2015-02-09 08:08:12

It was sad to see that because people like us do not lower ourselves to please
anybody. But since her life depended on him and she was in an insecure
position, she had to.

  

2015-02-09 08:08:55

“I can never do what Xuesong did,” Wenyan said. “I would rather sweep the
streets.”  
“Never say never,” Changhong replied. “You say this because you are not in her
position, and because you have options. I am sure some of us put in similar
situations might make similar choices.”  
The table became suddenly quiet. For a few moments, we sat in utter silence.
Maybe we were all thinking about what Changhong said: What would I do were I
in Xuesong’s situation?  
Could it have been me?

  

  Chapter 13 Tyranny of Mianzi

  

2015-02-09 08:40:17

Lihui came to cook for me every day. My normally happy and optimistic sister
was weighted down with worries about Cancan. I wanted to tell her, stop
struggling, let Cancan return to China if he cannot get a Maple Leaf Card; but
I knew that would burst her “My son is in Canada and doing well” mianzi.

  

2015-02-09 08:51:38

Facing the stigma of being a divorced woman, an unemployed worker, and
mistress to a married man, Lihui resolved to show the world and Huangpei she
and Cancan could live a good life. Her divorce left her guilt ridden about
Cancan. If she could not give Cancan a complete family, she was determined to
give him a better life. And she was prepared to sacrifice everything for that.
She sent him to a series of private schools and then to school in Canada
because the rich families in China sent their children to private schools and
schools abroad. She wanted to keep up. She knew that if people judged her an
unemployed worker instead of a member of the well-to-do, they would snub her
socially and in business. And secretly, Lihui had hoped after Cancan
established himself in Canada, she could immigrate there to join him. She was
tired of China’s inescapable guanxi networks and the tyranny of mianzi. At
fifty-four and with no college degree, Lihui had no chance to immigrate
herself. Cancan’s return to China would quash her only hope to escape to the
West.

  

2015-02-09 09:05:00

My sister Lijie looked like hell when she came to see me. Her face was liver
purple and swollen. Lihui told me Lijie’s accountant husband Kang had just
embezzled thirty thousand Yuan from his work unit to pay for his gambling
debt. To bail him out, Lijie spent her life savings restoring the funds to the
work unit. Were his crime found out, he would be fired and jailed. Lijie was
the most frugal person I knew who would not spend an extra Fen on herself. She
made four thousand Yuan a month; thirty thousand Yuan was nearly her annual
salary.

  

2015-02-09 09:08:04

Lijie was not as emotionally resilient as Lihui. She bottled up all her anger
and secretly felt ashamed. Many of her female college classmates had risen to
prominence or married powerful husbands, which exacerbated her feelings of
inferiority. She seldom socialized with any of them and shied away from class
reunions. She hid in a dark and airless psychological bunker that no one could
see through or enter.

  

2015-02-09 09:13:53

The pressures to hide under mianzi that trapped my parents and my siblings
were a microcosm of the pressures that trapped many Chinese today. No other
Chinese word cuts through Chinese culture as deeply as “Mianzi.” For thousands
of years generations of officials and scholars following Confucius observed a
code of honor that required them to place the needs of the emperor, the state,
their parents and the clan above their own needs. This code legislated
honor/dishonor and power/impotency depending on how scrupulously the
individual adhered to the code. One couldn’t hide or escape from the judgment
of mianzi because all private affairs were public affairs. To survive the
onslaught of constant surveillance, the Chinese people learned to affirm all
their social obligations and priorities with the armor of a public mask. The
private self was relegated to a cob-webbed corner of the psyche. No matter
what the circumstances, mianzi had to be upheld at all costs because to lose
face was to lose everything, sometimes more than life itself.

  

2015-02-09 09:16:48

To survive in China you must reveal nothing to others. Or it could be used
against you. That's why I've come to think the deepest part of the self is
best left unclear. Like mist and clouds in a Chinese landscape painting, hide
the private part behind your social persona. Let your public self be like rice
in a dinner: bland and inconspicuous, taking on the flavors of its
surroundings while giving off no flavor of its own. Too strong a personal
flavor and you may entice others to jealousy or hatred.

  

2015-02-09 09:16:59

This mindset spans everything from business to the cultural mainstream and
starts in early schooling. The Chinese interns who helped me research this
book told me that even with their college classmates they withheld their true
thoughts and feelings in fear they would be used against them. Chinese
“sophistication” required that one plays social poker and operate tactically
in stealth. In comparison, Americans, blunt and transparent, made themselves
easy patsies for Chinese “sophistication.”

  

2015-02-09 09:23:52

Mianzi saturated every aspect of Chinese society. Officials busied themselves
and their underlings on impractical projects wasting man power and money just
so he could look good to superiors. Scholars and scientists were not
interested in real research but promotions, raises, and fame. Artists and
musicians invested little in creating great art but much in getting gilded. It
became a joke to the international music community how many Chinese musicians
paid to play in the “Golden Hall” in Vienna just so they could add it to their
resume. Government officials so routinely inflated statistics to pad the
numbers that the Chinese public yawned at them.  
It suddenly dawned on me how mianzi, even more than desire, drove a man to
keep ernai and how women became ernai and xiaosan for mianzi as much as
luxury. A young and beautiful mistress validated a man’s status and virility.
And conversely, an ernai who hid her mistress identity from the world was an
enviable “somebody,” driving fancy cars, sporting designer bags and clothes,
and carrying the latest iPhone to match.

  

  Chapter 14 Daughter Raised in Luxury

  

2015-02-28 07:20:56

No one wanted to wait, whether to have sex or to marry.

  

2015-02-28 07:49:27

In my opinion, this is probably a reason why so many college girls are too
easy to get. They haven’t formed their own view on love before they are
seduced by money and vanity. Many of my school mates said yes to the first guy
who ever asked, they devoted themselves in unpredictable relationships just
because they needed love.

* * *

多看笔记 来自多看阅读 for Kindle

duokanbookid:gc94010dc8897ce3868deb20126126cg

