## 人性的弱点（英文版）

##### 【美】卡耐基

  

2013-06-21

What is this magic requirement? Just this: a deep, driving desire to learn, a
vigorous determination to increase your ability to deal with people.

  

2013-06-21

Stop frequently in your reading to think over what you are reading. Ask
yourself just how and when you can apply each suggestion.

  

2013-06-21

So, if you want to get a real, lasting benefit out of this book, don't imagine
that skimming through it once will suffice

  

2013-06-21

Bernard Shaw once remarked: "If you teach a man anything, he will never
learn." Shaw was right. Learning is an active process. We learn by doing

  

2013-06-21

For example, when you are displeased, it is much easier to criticize and
condemn than it is to try to understand the other person's viewpoint. It is
frequently easier to find fault than to find praise. It is more natural to
talk about what you want than to talk about what the other person wants

  

2013-06-21

1\. Develop a deep, driving desire to master the principles of human
relations. 2\. Read each chapter twice before going on to the next one. 3\. As
you read, stop frequently to ask yourself how you can apply each suggestion.
4\. Underscore each important idea. 5\. Review this book each month. 6\. Apply
these principles at every opportunity. Use this volume as a working handbook
to help you solve your daily problems. 7\. Make a lively game out of your
learning by offering some friend a dime or a dollar every time he or she
catches you violating one of these principles. 8\. Check up each week on the
progress you are making. Ask yourself what mistakes you have made, what
improvement, what lessons you have learned for the future. 9\. Keep notes in
the back of this book showing how and when you have applied these principles.

  

2013-06-21

Fundamental Techniques in Handling People Principle 1 Don't criticize, condemn
or complain. Principle 2 Give honest and sincere appreciation. Principle 3
Arouse in the other person an eager want.

  

2013-06-21

Six Ways to Make People Like You Principle 1 Become genuinely interested in
other people. Principle 2 Smile. Principle 3 Remember that a person's name is
to that person the sweetest and most important sound in any language.
Principle 4 Be a good listener. Encourage others to talk about themselves.
Principle 5 Talk in terms of the other person's interests. Principle 6 Make
the other person feel important-and do it sincerely.

  

2013-06-21

Win People to Your Way of Thinking Principle 1 The only way to get the best of
an argument is to avoid it. Principle 2 Show respect for the other person's
opinions. Never say, "You're wrong." Principle 3 If you are wrong, admit it
quickly and emphatically. Principle 4 Begin in a friendly way. Principle 5 Get
the other person saying "yes, yes" immediately. Principle 6 Let the other
person do a great deal of the talking. Principle 7 Let the other person feel
that the idea is his or hers. Principle 8 Try honestly to see things from the
other person's point of view. Principle 9 Be sympathetic with the other
person's ideas and desires. Principle 10 Appeal to the nobler motives.
Principle 11 Dramatize your ideas. Principle 12 Throw down a challenge.

  

2013-06-21

Be a Leader A leader's job often includes changing your people's attitudes and
behavior. Some suggestions to accomplish this: Principle 1 Begin with praise
and honest appreciation. Principle 2 Call attention to people's mistakes
indirectly. Principle 3 Talk about your own mistakes before criticizing the
other person. Principle 4 Ask questions instead of giving direct orders.
Principle 5 Let the other person save face. Principle 6 Praise the slightest
improvement and praise every improvement. Be "hearty in your approbation and
lavish in your praise." Principle 7 Give the other person a fine reputation to
live up to. Principle 8 Use encouragement. Make the fault seem easy to
correct. Principle 9 Make the other person happy about doing the thing you
suggest.

  

2013-06-21

Seven Rules for Making Your Home Life Happier Rule 1 Don't nag. Rule 2 Don't
try to make your partner over. Rule 3 Don't criticize. Rule 4 Give honest
appreciation. Rule 5 Pay little attentions. Rule 6 Be courteous. Rule 7 Read a
good book on the sexual side of marriage.

* * *

多看笔记 来自多看阅读 for Android

duokanbookid:160d321eb77e11e1b8ef00163e0060da

