## History of video games

##### en.wikipedia.org

  

2013-12-03 22:45:45

Video gaming would not reach mainstream popularity until the 1970s and 1980s,
when arcade video games, gaming consoles and home computer games were
introduced to the general public. Since then, video gaming has become a
popular form of entertainment and a part of modern culture in most parts of
the world. As of 2013, there are eight generations of video game consoles.

  

2013-12-03 22:51:10

One program that stands out in this early period — both for its atypical
subject matter and its subsequent notoriety in a series of patent lawsuits —
is Tennis for Two (1958), created by physicist William Higinbotham to
entertain guests at the annual visitor’s day held by the Brookhaven National
Laboratory. This program displayed a tennis court in side view on an
oscilloscope and allowed two players to volley a ball using box-​shaped
controllers equipped with a knob for trajectory and a button for hitting the
ball.

  

2013-12-03 23:11:53

In September 1971, Galaxy Game was installed at Stanford University. Based on
Spacewar!, this was the first coin-​operated video game. Only one was built,
using a DEC PDP-​11 and vector display terminals. In 1972 it was expanded to
be able to handle four to eight consoles.

  

2013-12-03 23:14:31

Bushnell and Dabney founded Atari, Inc. in 1972, before releasing their next
game: Pong. Pong was the first arcade video game with widespread success. The
game is loosely based on table tennis: a ball is “served” from the center of
the court and as the ball moves towards their side of the court each player
must maneuver their paddle to hit the ball back to their opponent. Allan
Alcorn created Pong as a training exercise assigned to him by Atari co-founder
Nolan Bushnell. Bushnell based the idea on an electronic ping-pong game
included in the Magnavox Odyssey, which later resulted in a lawsuit against
Atari. Surprised by the quality of Alcorn’s work, Bushnell and Dabney decided
to manufacture the game. Atari sold over 19,000 Pong machines,[5] creating
many imitators.

  

2013-12-03 23:15:35

Another significant game was Gun Fight,[6] an on-​foot, multi-​directional
shooter,[7] designed by Tomohiro Nishikado and released by Taito in 1975.[8]
It depicted game characters,[9]game violence, and human-​to-​human combat,[10]
controlled using dual-​stick controls.[11] The original Japanese version was
based on discrete logic,[8] which Dave Nutting adapted for Midway’s American
release using the Intel 8080, making it the first video game to use a
microprocessor.[12

  

2013-12-03 23:19:06

The first home ‘console’ system was developed by Ralph Baer and his
associates. Development began in 1966 and a working prototype was completed by
1968 (called the “Brown Box”) for demonstration to various potential
licensees, including GE, Sylvania, RCA, Philco, and Sears, with Magnavox
eventually licensing the technology to produce the world’s first home video
game console.[13][14] The system was released in the USA in 1972 by Magnavox,
called the Magnavox Odyssey.

  

2013-12-03 23:21:19

In 1977, manufacturers of older, obsolete consoles and Pong clones sold their
systems at a loss to clear stock, creating a glut in the market[18] and
causing Fairchild and RCA to abandon their game consoles. Only Atari and
Magnavox remained in the home console market, despite suffering losses in 1977
and 1978.[19] The crash was largely caused by the significant number of Pong
clones that flooded both the arcade and home markets. The crash eventually
came to an end with the success of Taito’s Space Invaders, released in 1978,
sparking a renaissance for the video game industry and paving the way for the
golden age of arcade video games.[18] Soon after, Space Invaders was licensed
for the Atari VCS (later known as Atari 2600), becoming the first big hit and
quadrupling the console’s sales.[20] This helped Atari recover from their
earlier losses.[19] The success of the Atari 2600 in turn revived the home
video game market, up until the North American video game crash of 1983.[21]

  

2013-12-03 23:27:41

In the earliest consoles, the computing logic for one or more games was
hardwired into microchips using discrete logic, and no additional games could
ever be added. In other words, these consoles were single-purpose computers,
not programmable computers; there was no software, only hardware, so no change
of software was possible. This was an obvious issue for developers; customers
would have to buy a whole new device to attach to their TV sets in order to
play different games. By the mid-1970s, game consoles contained general-
purpose microprocessors and video games were found on cartridges, starting in
1976 with the release of the Fairchild Video Entertainment System (VES).

  

2013-12-03 23:28:42

Programs were burned onto ROM chips (ICs) that were mounted inside plastic
cartridge casings that could be plugged into slots on the game console. When
the cartridges were plugged in, the ROM electrically became a part of the
microcomputer in the console, just as if the ROM ICs were on the same circuit
board with the microprocessor inside the console, and the microprocessor would
execute whatever program was stored in the ROM. Rather than being confined to
a small selection of games included in the game system, consumers could now
amass libraries of game cartridges. However video game production was still a
niche skill. Warren Robinett, the famous programmer of the game Adventure,
spoke on developing games: “In those old far-off days, each game for the 2600
was done entirely by one person, the programmer, who conceived the game
concept, wrote the program, did the graphics—drawn first on graph paper and
converted by hand to hexadecimal—and did the sounds.“[22]

  

2013-12-03 23:34:16

The arcade game industry entered its golden age in 1978 with the release of
Space Invaders by Taito, a success that inspired dozens of manufacturers to
enter the market.[18][27] The game inspired arcade machines to become
prevalent in mainstream locations such as shopping malls, traditional
storefronts, restaurants and convenience stores during the golden age.[28] The
game also became the subject of numerous articles and stories on television
and in newspapers and magazines, establishing video gaming as a rapidly
growing mainstream hobby.[29][30]Space Invaders would go on to sell over
360,000 arcade cabinets worldwide,[31] and by 1982, generate a revenue of $2
billion in quarters,[32] equivalent to $4.6 billion in 2011.[33] In 1979,
Namco’s Galaxian sold over 40,000 cabinets in the United States,[34] and Atari
released Asteroids which sold over 70,000 cabinets.[35]

  

2013-12-03 23:35:23

By 1981, the arcade video game industry was generating an annual revenue of $5
billion in North America,[18][41] equivalent to $12.3 billion in 2011.[33] In
1982, the arcade video game industry reached its peak, generating $8 billion
in quarters,[26] equivalent to over $18.5 billion in 2011,[33] surpassing the
annual gross revenue of both pop music ($4 billion) and Hollywood films ($3
billion) combined at that time.[26] This was also nearly twice as much revenue
as the $3.8 billion generated by the home video game industry that same year;
both the arcade and home markets combined add up to a total revenue of $11.8
billion for the video game industry in 1982,[26] equivalent to over $27.3
billion in 2011.[33] The arcade video game industry would continue to generate
an annual revenue of $5 billion in quarters through to 1985.[42]

* * *

多看笔记 来自多看阅读 for Kindle

duokanbookid:w4e224bd088e43b6449g093cg416e5eb

