## 114 Elon Musk



2014-01-05 11:08:48

Elon: If there are 2 paths and we have to choose one thing or the other, and
one wasn’t obviously better than the other, then rather than spend a lot of
time trying to figure out which one is slightly better, we’ll just pick one
and do it. Sometimes we’d be wrong and we picked the suboptimal path, often
it’s better to pick a path and do it than to just vacillate on a choice.



2014-01-05 11:08:54

Elon(When asked to compare Zip2 and Paypal, which are the 2 companies he built
before SpaceX and Tesla): I took the similar approaches to building both
companies, which was to have a small group of very talented people and keep it
small. Paypal had about 30 engineers, for a system that I would say is more
sophisticated than Federal Reserve Clearing System.



2014-01-05 11:09:19

Elon (When asked about the most important qualities of Entrepreneurs): An
obsessive nature with respect to the quality of the product is very important,
so being obsessive and impulsive is a good thing in this context. Really
liking what you do, whoever area you get into, even if you are the best of the
best, there always a chance of failure, so it’s important that what you really
like what you are doing, if you don’t like it, life is too short. If you like
what you are doing, you’ll think about it even when you are not working, it’s
something your mind is drawn to, you just really can’t make it work, I think



2014-01-05 12:34:37

I think one thing important is try not to serialize dependencies, put as many
elements in parallel as possible, a lot of things have a gestation period,
it’s very hard to accelerate that gestation period, if you can have all those
things gestating in parallel, then that is one way to substantially accelerate
your timeline. I think people tend to serialize things too much.



2014-01-05 12:44:10

Elon: Space is a tough one for first-time entrepreneurs, you better off
starting something that requires low capital, and space is a high capital
effort.



2014-01-05 12:47:40

Elon: I don’t ever give up. I’d have to be dead or completely incapacitated.



2014-01-05 12:55:19

If you ask Elon how he taught himself rocket science, he will just look at you
very seriously and just say very quietly: I read a lot of books.



2014-01-05 14:16:20

Elon: I read a lot of books, and talked to less people. I didn’t have any one
person who was a mentor, but I always looked for feedback from people around
me, and feedbacks from historical context, which is book, basically.



2014-01-05 14:21:57

Elon: I didn’t actually read many general business books, but I like reading
biographies and autobiographies, I think those are pretty helpful. For
example, Franklin’s. I would say he’s one of the people I always admire,
Franklin is pretty awesome



2014-01-05 14:25:56

Elon: At the beginning of starting SpaceX, I thought that the most likely
outcome is failure.



2014-01-05 14:30:11

“Most people, when they make a lot of money don’t want to risk it,” he says.
“For me it was never about money, but solving problems for the future of
humanity.” He does not laugh or crack a smile when he says this. There is no
hint of irony.



2014-01-05 14:34:59

Elon: Most papers are pretty useless. How many phd papers are actually used by
someone ever?



2014-01-05 14:38:13

Elon: There’s just a very small amount of the mental energy is on the big
picture, you know where you are generally heading for, and the actual path is
gonna be some zig-zaggy thing, try not to deviate too far from the path, but
you gonna have to do that in some degree



2014-01-05 14:41:35

“Elon has the incredible ability and determination to work and work on an idea
until he has the solution,” says his brother Kimbal. “If he believes it’s
possible – and he always does when it’s a problem he’s working on – there’s no
option for turning back with him. When 99.99 per cent of people would have
given up, Elon finds the solution that amazes everyone around him.”



2014-01-05 14:42:17

“Work like hell. I mean you just have to put in 80 to 100 hour weeks every
week. [This] improves the odds of success. If other people are putting in 40
hour work weeks and you’re putting in 100 hour work weeks, then even if you’re
doing the same thing you know that….you will achieve in 4 months what it takes
them a year to achieve.”



2014-01-05 14:43:44

“I think it’s very important to have a feedback loop. Like where you’re
constantly thinking about what you’ve done and how you could be doing it
better. I think that’s probably the single best bit of advice, is just
constantly be thinking about how you could do things better and questioning
yourself.”



2014-01-05 14:50:48

Persistence is very important. You should not give up unless you are forced to
give up.” He later says: “You have to be cautious in always saying one should
always persist and never give up because there actually are times when you
should give up, because you’re doing something in error. But if you’re
convinced that what you’re doing is correct then you should never give up.”



2014-01-05 14:58:19

Working with him isn’t a comfortable experience, he is never satisfied with
himself so he is never really satisfied with anyone around him. He pushes
himself harder and harder and he pushes others around him the exact same way.
The challenge is that he is a machine and the rest of us aren’t. So if you
work for Elon you have to accept the discomfort. But in that discomfort is the
kind of growth you can’t get anywhere else, and worth every ounce of blood and
sweat.

  

I can sort of figure out what's the right amount of sleep, I found I can drop
below certain threshold of sleep, although I would be awake more hours and I
can sustain it, I would get less done, because mental accuraty would be
affected. I found generally the right amount for me is 6 - 6.5 hrs  

  

"At age 15, Musk decided that the path to self-actualization traveled through
the U.S. His mother was born in Canada, which was close enough. Musk got a
Canadian passport, bought a plane ticket, and arrived in Montreal with little
money and no home. He spent the year showing up unannounced on the doorsteps
of distant Canadian relatives and doing stints on farms, tending vegetable
patches, and shoveling grain. The low point was cleaning out boilers at a
lumber mill. “You had to put on this hazmat suit and shimmy through this
little tunnel,” Musk recalls. “Then you take this steaming goop and shovel it
back into the hole you just came through and wait for someone else to put it
into a wheelbarrow.” Musk eventually made his way to Queen’s University in
Ontario for two years and then to the University of Pennsylvania, where he got
degrees in economics and physics.”  

  

By the time he's 10, he's reading eight to ten hours a day.

  

"I'd never seen anything like it," says Chris Thompson, explaining what
persuaded him to leave a senior position at Boeing to oversee "structures" at
SpaceX. "He was the quickest learner I've ever come across. You had this guy
who knew everything from a business point of view, but who was also clearly
capable of knowing everything from a technical point of view—and the place he
was creating was a blank sheet of paper." Musk says (as do the rocket
scientists he works with) that after founding SpaceX, it took him "about two
years to get up to speed." How is such a thing possible?

  

"Meetings", he's fond of saying, "are what happens when people aren't
working.”

  

Perhaps the most remarkable thing about Elon Musk's drawing power is that, as
strange as it may seem, he is not a particularly charming or charismatic
person. Charm and charisma require, first, the desire to be charming and
charismatic and, second, the ability to execute; both of these require energy.
And Elon, a man deeply attuned to the physics of his energy—its caloric and
intellectual and financial and historical value—simply isn't interested in
using it to light up a room. And yet there is some…thing whereby Elon Musk
enters a room and both the space and the other people in it suddenly seem
distilled. What is that—and how does it obviate the questions about charm and
charisma and even likability?

  

"Life has to be about more than solving problems, you've got to have reasons
to be inspired and to stay excited about life.”

  

"Lots of people say that no matter if you are right or wrong, you don't battle
with New York Times. To hell with that, I would rather tell the truth and
suffer the consequences even if they are negative"  

* * *

多看笔记 来自多看阅读 for Kindle

duokanbookid:g069f3e69b26ff13g65f2e290eb2c0ee

