## Men Are from Mars, Women Are from Venus

##### John Gray

  

  13\. Keeping the Magic of Love Alive

  

2014-05-20 07:23:17

Fortunately perfection is not a requirement for creating great relationships.

  

2014-05-20 07:24:23

You cannot, nor should you ever try to, change your partner. That is his or
her job. Your job is to change the ways you communicate, react, and respond to
your partner.

  

2014-05-20 07:48:58

Regarding finding a date, dating, living together, and the engagement process,
I wrote Mars and Venus on a Date.

  

2014-05-20 07:49:03

Regarding long-term relationships and marriage, I wrote Mars and Venus
Together Forever.

  

2014-05-20 07:52:22

Regarding the secrets of great sex, I wrote Mars and Venus in the Bedroom.

  

2014-05-20 07:52:30

For individuals recovering from the loss of love, whether through breaking up,
divorce, or a death, I wrote Mars and Venus Starting Over.

  

2014-05-20 07:52:57

For those in healthy relationships wishing to sustain those good feelings and
grow in love, I wrote Men Are from Mars, Women Are from Venus Book of Days, a
series of short essays for each day of the year.

  

2014-05-20 07:53:06

For couples experiencing more challenging problems like infidelity, violence,
and addictions, I wrote Mars and Venus in Love.

  

2014-05-20 07:53:16

For parents wanting to communicate more effectively with their little Martians
and Venusians, I wrote Children Are from Heaven.

  

2014-05-20 07:53:27

For those seeking to achieve a competitive edge through gender-based
communication skills, I wrote How to Get What You Want at Work.

  

2014-05-20 07:54:29

For those suffering from serious illness and seeking empowerment through
practical self-healing skills and techniques, I wrote Practical Miracles for
Mars and Venus.

  

2014-05-20 07:54:35

For those seeking greater personal success, I wrote How to Get What You Want
and Want What You Have.

  

2014-05-20 07:54:55

Finally, in response to recent research on our hormonal differences as well as
differences in brain chemistry, I developed and wrote the Mars and Venus Diet
and Exercise Solution.

  

2014-05-21 06:44:42

It is certainly true that a woman’s love will inspire a man to become all that
he can be, but it is up to him to make that change. Her job is to communicate
her love in a way that truly supports him.

  

2014-05-21 06:50:14

When men and women are single for a long time, the differences are sometimes
not as defined. These common differences will generally show up the most after
getting involved in an intimate relationship, having children together, or
when we are under a lot of stress.

  

2014-05-21 07:06:37

For example, when a man is distant, rather than assuming he is not interested
in her or imagining that he is mad at her, a woman can instead realize that he
is just recuperating from a stressful day. With this insight she is free from
worry and knows to give him space to be in his “cave” and eventually he will
come out. Or when a woman is talking about the problems of her day, rather
than assuming she is looking for solutions and giving solutions, a man can
instead recognize that she is just needing to talk about her day and as a
result she will feel better.

  

2014-05-21 07:19:07

Then something started to happen that would change my life. Bonnie said,
“Stop, please don’t leave. This is when I need you the most. I’m in pain. I
haven’t slept in days. Please listen to me.”

  

2014-05-21 07:28:16

She said, “John Gray, you’re a fair-weather friend! As long as I’m sweet,
loving Bonnie you are here for me, but as soon as I’m not, you walk right out
that door.” Then she paused, and her eyes filled up with tears. As her tone
shifted she said, “Right now I’m in pain. I have nothing to give, this is when
I need you the most. Please, come over here and hold me. You don’t have to say
anything. I just need to feel your arms around me. Please don’t go.” I walked
over and silently held her. She wept in my arms. After a few minutes, she
thanked me for not leaving. She told me that she just needed to feel me
holding her.

  

2014-05-21 07:35:35

That day, for the first time, I didn’t leave her. I stayed, and it felt great.
I succeeded in giving to her when she really needed me. This felt like real
love. Caring for another person. Trusting in our love. Being there at her hour
of need. I marveled at how easy it was for me to support her when I was shown
the way.

  

2014-05-23 07:13:01

Men mistakenly expect women to think, communicate, and react the way men do;
women mistakenly expect men to feel, communicate, and respond the way women
do. We have forgotten that men and women are supposed to be different. As a
result our relationships are filled with unnecessary friction and conflict.

  

2014-05-23 07:13:39

two biggest mistakes we make in relating to the opposite sex: men mistakenly
offer solutions and invalidate feelings while women offer unsolicited advice
and direction.

  

2014-05-23 07:28:24

Achieving goals is very important to a Martian because it is a way for him to
prove his competence and thus feel good about himself. And for him to feel
good about himself he must achieve these goals by himself. Someone else can’t
achieve them for him. Martians pride themselves in doing things all by
themselves. Autonomy is a symbol of efficiency, power, and competence.

  

2014-05-23 07:28:33

Understanding this Martian characteristic can help women understand why men
resist so much being corrected or being told what to do. To offer a man
unsolicited advice is to presume that he doesn’t know what to do or that he
can’t do it on his own. Men are very touchy about this, because the issue of
competence is so very important to them.

  

2014-05-23 07:32:29

Once he has offered a solution, however, and she continues to be upset it
becomes increasingly difficult for him to listen because his solution is being
rejected and he feels increasingly useless. He has no idea that by just
listening with empathy and interest he can be supportive. He does not know
that on Venus talking about problems is not an invitation to offer a solution.

  

2014-05-23 07:35:32

Instead of being goal oriented, women are relationship oriented; they are more
concerned with expressing their goodness, love, and caring.

  

2014-05-23 07:36:04

Venusians are very intuitive. They have developed this ability through
centuries of anticipating the needs of others. They pride themselves in being
considerate of the needs and feelings of others. A sign of great love is to
offer help and assistance to another Venusian without being asked.

  

2014-05-23 07:37:43

Generally speaking, when a woman offers unsolicited advice or tries to “help”
a man, she has no idea of how critical and unloving she may sound to him. Even
though her intent is loving, her suggestions do offend and hurt. His reaction
may be strong, especially if he felt criticized as a child or he experienced
his father being criticized by his mother.

  

2014-05-23 07:40:22

Likewise, if a man does not understand how a woman is different, he can make
things worse when he is trying to help. Men need to remember that women talk
about problems to get close and not necessarily to get solutions

  

2014-05-23 07:40:51

1\. A man tries to change a woman’s feelings when she is upset by becoming Mr.
Fix-It and offering solutions to her problems that invalidate her feelings.

  

2014-05-23 07:40:57

2\. A woman tries to change a man’s behavior when he makes mistakes by
becoming the home-improvement committee and offering unsolicited advice or
criticism.

  

2014-06-04 07:03:46

To practice listening without offering any invalidating comments or solutions
is, however, a big step.

  

2014-06-04 07:05:05

To practice giving acceptance and not giving advice and criticism is, however,
a big step.

  

2014-06-04 07:06:53

One of the biggest differences between men and women is how they cope with
stress. Men become increasingly focused and withdrawn while women become
increasingly overwhelmed and emotionally involved. At these times, a man’s
needs for feeling good are different from a woman’s. He feels better by
solving problems while she feels better by talking about problems. Not
understanding and accepting these differences creates unnecessary friction in
our relationships.

  

2014-06-04 07:09:41

Men are motivated and empowered when they feel needed. When a man does not
feel needed in a relationship, he gradually becomes passive and less
energized; with each passing day he has less to give the relationship. On the
other hand, when he feels trusted to do his best to fulfill her needs and
appreciated for his efforts, he is empowered and has more to give

  

2014-06-04 07:11:28

women are motivated and empowered when they feel cherished. When a woman does
not feel cherished in a relationship she gradually becomes compulsively
responsible and exhausted from giving too much. On the other hand when she
feels cared for and respected, she is fulfilled and has more to give as well.

  

2014-06-04 07:15:18

One of the paradoxes of loving relationships is that when things are going
well and we are feeling loved, we may suddenly find ourselves emotionally
distancing our partners or reacting to them in unloving ways.

  

2014-06-04 07:20:28

If you want your partner to be more sensitive to your feelings, let them
experience the painful feelings of your past. Then they can understand your
sensitivities. Love Letters are an excellent opportunity to do this.

  

2014-06-04 07:27:29

Falling in love is like springtime. We feel as though we will be happy
forever. We cannot imagine not loving our partner. It is a time of innocence.
Love seems eternal. It is a magical time when everything seems perfect and
works effortlessly. Our partner seems to be the perfect fit. We effortlessly
dance together in harmony and rejoice in our good fortune.

  

2014-06-04 07:27:35

Throughout the summer of our love we realize our partner is not as perfect as
we thought, and we have to work on our relationship. Not only is our partner
from another planet, but he or she is also a human who makes mistakes and is
flawed in certain ways.

  

2014-06-04 07:29:04

As a result of tending the garden during the summer, we get to harvest the
results of our hard work. Fall has come. It is a golden time—rich and
fulfilling. We experience a more mature love that accepts and understands our
partner’s imperfections as well as our own. It is a time of thanksgiving and
sharing. Having worked hard during summer we can relax and enjoy the love we
have created.

  

2014-06-04 07:29:16

Then the weather changes again, and winter comes. During the cold, barren
months of winter, all of nature pulls back within itself. It is a time of
rest, reflection, and renewal. This is a time in relationships when we
experience our own unresolved pain or our shadow self. It is when our lid
comes off and our painful feelings emerge. It is a time of solitary growth
when we need to look more to ourselves than to our partners for love and
fulfillment. It is a time of healing. This is the time when men hibernate in
their caves and women sink to the bottom of their wells.

* * *

多看笔记 来自多看阅读 for Kindle

duokanbookid:pcff601dff9986212bb66c116e22d946

