# Quiet

Quiet: The Power of Introverts in a World That Can't Stop Talking by Susan Cain explains the
introversion/extroversion scale. It also explains how an introvert can take advantage of his/her
personality in a world that prefers extroverts.

# Part 1: The Extrovert Ideal

Extroversion is defined by heightened sociability - extroverts tend to be assertive, socially
dominant, think out loud, prefer talking over listening, more comfortable with conflict than
solitude, more inclined towards risk-taking. These descriptions are more likely but not 100%
guaranteed in extroverts.

Introversion is defined by reduced sociability - they tend to listen more than talk, express better
with writing over conversation, dislike conflict, prefer deep discussions over small talk, prefer
being at home instead of at a social party, have a heightened sense of empathy.

It's not a dichotomy though, it's a scale. A person can fall somewhere in the middle of both
extremes.

Western Culture emphasizes an "Extrovert Ideal" - it's better to be more talkative and sociable. The
ideal person is an alpha leader that's comfortable in the spotlight. In our education system,
we push students to all become extroverted leaders. Corporations promote extroverts over introverts.

Harvard Business School pushes discussion, social skills, and other extroverted abilities above all
else. But is that really the best strategy? An example game was given, where students role play a
disaster survival scenario. They're given a list of resources and asked to rate them 1-10. There are
survival experts which grade their ratings later. Students create individual lists first, then
discuss with their group to form an optimized list. If any single student scores higher than the
entire group's list, that group fails. Some groups had survival experts with great ratings, but those
experts weren't assertive. Instead of the most correct/best ideas winning, the students who were the
most assertive won (which meant the entire group loss).

What about group work vs individual work? Many schools/corporations push brainstorming and
collaborations. Except it's not always ideal. Many people get their best ideas while working alone.
Empirical data shows that creative work - from music training to learning a craft - is best done
alone. Offices pushing open office spaces are hurting their employees.

# Part 2: Your Biology, Your Self?

Is introversion/extroversion determined by our biological make-up? Can a person change?

An experiment was done on 500 four month old infants: they were exposed to new experiences and their
reactions were measured. Reactions ranged from doing nothing to crying out loud. Scientists
hypothesized that infants who were high-reactive would grow up to be introverts. Low-reactive
infants would grow up to be extroverts.

Sensitivity and introversion seemed to be correlated. High reactive infants were sensitive to the
new experiences. Two things to learn from this are: introverts should realize they're more sensitive
to the world than their peers and introverts might have to work harder to communicate what others
were not sensitive enough to learn.

A higher risk tolerance seems to be tied to extroversion. Introverts are more afraid of making
mistakes and other losses. An experiment had subjects push a button after displaying a number. If
the number was "correct", subjects earned money. If wrong, subjects lost money. Extroverts tend to
speed up after making a mistake - seeking the reward. Introverts slowed down - attempting to be more
careful and lose less.

# Part 3: Do All Cultures Have an Extrovert Ideal?

Whereas European cultures tend to idealize extroverts, Asian cultures focus more on introverts.
Asian cultures emphasize calmness, tranquility, listening skills, and thoughtful speaking.

At Harvard Business school, students were taught to be assertive and speak with 100% conviction -
even if they were unsure if their argument was correct. Students were encouraged to talk even if
they had nothing to add to the conversation. Asian societies focused more on listening and speaking
to add value.

Cain gives the example of Gandhi, who was often quiet during many minor conflicts. He chose which
battles to fight, conceding on conflicts that didn't matter and focusing on larger goals.

# Part 4: How to Love, How to Work

Introverts can change their persona as the situation requires. It's more important to know when to
fake extroverted qualities. Faking these traits will add stress, since it's outside an introvert's
comfort zone.

It's best work together: use the advantages of each group to push everyone higher. Opposites should
appreciate each other's viewpoints instead of casting blame.

Parents should pay attention to how their children interact socially. Most school activities are
catered towards introverts. Parents can help introverted children feel better about themselves.
