# Small Move, Big Change

By Caroline L. Arnold - ever make a New Year resolution and completely failed? Arnold comes up with
Microresolutions, small changes that we make to create or eliminate habits resulting in big
improvements.

# The Seven Rules of Microresolutions

Part 1 covers what a microresolution is and how to make one yourself. There are seven rules:

**1. A microresolution is easy.** Don't make resolutions you can't keep. Instead of walk everywhere
all the time, think walk to work every Monday. Instead of being on a 100% healthy diet, think adding
one apple per day. Your microresolution must be absolutely achievable. It must be a solid commitment
you know will be done.

**2. A microresolution is an explicit and measurable action.** It's more about doing than being.
Instead of being more organized, commit to putting away your mail in an inbox immediately after
receiving it. Instead of being a novelist, commit to writing ~2 sentences every night after brushing
your teeth. Instead of getting a good night sleep, commit to going to bed by 9PM everyday. You'll
notice every commitment has a cue. A good habit is always prefixed with a cue (your cue can even be
an existing habit.)

**3. A microresolution pays off up front.** Your time frame is today instead of someday. Instead of
keeping the house neat at all times, have a specific time to make your bed - perhaps every morning
after you wake up. Losing twenty pounds is a goal, not a microresolution. Instead commit to stop
eating everyday after 8PM. The reward for your habits must be for the short-term (although it can
and will probably have long term benefits also.)

**4. A microresolution is personal.** The more specific your resolution is, the better. Think
carefully about which behaviors you can change to achieve your desired outcome. Arnold wanted to
arrive to work on-time more, so she decided to prepare her cash/keys/transit card when she came home
from work instead of in the mornings. She also wanted to lose weight, a resolution that many failed.
It was as simple as coming up with a new personal habit: to chew her food slowly by dining leisurely
and savoring foods/drinks.

**5. A microresolution resonates.** Attach a specific message to your microresolution and give it a
positive spin. It's hard to stick to the habit: chew your food slowly. Instead, Arnold changed the
message to: I resolve to dine leisurely and savor my food and drink. By creating a message that
resonates, you'll make your microresolution easier to accomplish! There's also the special
zero-tolerance microresolutions. Sometimes it's easier to follow a rule 100% than to give yourself
any doubt. For example: no eating after 8PM is easier to do than don't eat late. If you're hungry,
you may bend the meaning of "late".

**6. A microresolution fires on cue.** We go on autopilot as a result of triggers and cues, such as
waking up to an alarm or eating unhealthy snacks which are readily available. When you make your
microresolution, include a cue for which to trigger it. For example: after I brush my teeth I will
write 2 sentences for my novel. The opposite holds true for quitting bad habits. If you find
yourself constantly eating unhealthy snacks, figure out what the cue is and eliminate it. Make it
more difficult to eat those bad snacks.

**7. Make microresolutions just two at a time.** Resist the urge to do too much at once. Practice
makes perfect. It's better to achieve everlasting change than to attempt too much and fail after a
short period of time. It may take months before your new habits stick. Wait until those habits are
on autopilot until you attempt more.

# Microresolutions in Action

Part 2 covers some ideas for microresolutions and habits.

**1. Sleep ** - why are you staying awake longer than needed? Most people do it to fit in more
recreational activities since time is a scarce resource. Some example microresolutions include
having zero tolerance for recreational computing after 10PM, refusing to snack after 10PM, watch
only prerecorded television on weeknights, or get ready to bed by 10PM. Sleep is a great start for
microresolutions because it serves as a foundation for stronger willpower. Remind yourself, you'll
be more successful when you get more sleep.

**2. Fitness ** - reduce your exercise commitments to something easy. Resolve to use the stairs
instead of the elevator every Monday or to go for a walk every Friday. Don't get a gym pass and
think you'll go to the gym every night. Make fitness easier for yourself, consider analyzing your
typical day to find the best day of the week or hour of the day for fitness habits.

**3. Diet and Nutrition ** - be satisfied with less with conscious eating. An example habit that
Arnold mentioned was to chew slowly and savor every bite. To quit snacking, consider only eating
when you're sitting down at a table meant specifically for meals. Consider committing to eating an
apple a day, the extra calories will soon knock out some of your more unhealthier picks. Growing one
habit a time will do more than committing to a difficult habit and giving up. Another example was
adding a small salad to lunches every day, which eventually became half salad half soups, and soon
became mostly salads.

**4. Clutter ** - if you're a snob, you may want to start by preparing for trash/recycling once a
week. You could also have zero tolerance for briefcases, books, and papers left in the living room.
After you move a microresolution to autopilot for one room, consider committing to another room.
Think about never leaving a kitchen utility out of its assigned drawer.

**5. Relationships ** - Arnold resolved to stop apologizing to her husband when she really didn't
mean it. She discovered that the apology was just a precursor so she could defend herself. Most bad
habits in relationships can be analyzed. Find a cue and remove it. Make a microresolution to always
pay attention to your partner and to single-task/focus during conversations. Resolve to always keep
eye contact or to ask questions, rather than just nodding in an absent way.

**6. Spending ** - some example habits include resolving to stop buying bottled soft drinks, packing
lunches every Monday, never withdraw money from ATMs which charge a fee, review accounts on the 15th
of each month, research at least one bill for savings on the 1st Saturday of each month, or give up
shopping on the Internet after 10PM.

**7. Punctuality ** - you can resolve to have zero tolerance for hitting the snooze button more than
once on a weekday morning, changing the time of day for showers, or analyzing your day to find
habits to increase punctuality. A series of microresolutions related to picking clothing,
breakfasts, hygiene, or getting ready for work will sum up to a large amount of time saved.

**8. Organization ** - make a microresolution to cull mail immediately after you walk into your
apartment, to open all mail before putting it away, to make the scariest calls first, or to maintain
a list of three most important tasks every morning.