# Khan Academy: Biology

These are my notes from Salman Khan's Biology videos. For the full videos, see
<http://www.khanacademy.org>.

# Introduction to Evolution and Natural Selection

**Evolution** and natural selection are tightly integrated. Most people think of a giraffe, who
started out with a short neck which got longer at each generation for utility. That's not the case.

In any given species, there are **variations**. Blue vs green eyes, short vs tall, etc... Khan gives
the example of pepper moths. A part of the population had white spots on them. After the industrial
revolution, trees got polluted with soot. Predators had a harder time hunting moths with solid black
colors. This is called **natural selection**, the variation with the best chance of survival becomes
popular.

# Intelligent Design and Evolution

**Intelligent Design** argues that some species/organs are so complex and awe inspiring that there's
no way it was an act of random natural selection.

# Deoxyribonucleic Acid

**DNA** stands for **deoxyribonucleic acid**. It's what codes all of our genetic information.

DNA is structured as a double-helix. There are two helixes, intertwined with each other that are
connected by bridges. The helixes are made up of Phosphate- deoxyribose. The brides are made up of:

* Adenine
* Thymine
* Guanine
* Cytosine

The bridge is always made up of two molecules. Adenine always pairs with thymine. Guanine always
pairs with cytosine. When DNA strands are written, we usually just use the first letters of each
molecule.

    ACTG  // example strand
    TGAC  // example pairing

There **human genome** has 3 billion base pairs.

A strand of DNA will go through **transcription** and transcribe a pairing **RNA** or **ribonucleic
acid**. In RNA, instead of a Thymine there's a **Uracil**. The transcribed RNA is actually called
mRNA or messenger RNA.

    ATGCACGTA  // example DNA strand
    UACGUGCAU  // example transcribed RNA strand
 
The mRNA leaves the nucleus, goes into the cell's cytoplasm and to ribosomes. At the ribosomes, it's
**translated** to proteins.

The mRNA bonds with tRNA molecules or **Transfer RNA**. The tRNA themselves are attached to 20
different amino acids. **Amino Acids** are the building blocks of protein and can be coded by 3
different bases (4^3). The tRNA molecules act like trucks for the amino acids.

      UAC CUG   <-- mRNA
      AUG GAC   <-- tRNA, 3 base pairs is also called a Codon
      ||| |||
    AMINO-ACIDS <-- form protein

The amino acids start to bond with each other when they're close. Once they bond the tRNA detaches.
The amino acids form a chain and start folding into complex patterns to form proteins.

Proteins range from 150 amino acids (450 base pairs) to 1500 amino acids (4500 base pairs). Proteins
then perform functions in our biological systems like helping to transport blood.

A **Gene** is a portion of our chromosome which codes for a specific function or protein. Each
variant of a gene is called an **Allele**.

DNA winds around on itself. When it's all bundled up into a large portion, it's called a
**chromosome**. We have 23 pairs of chromosomes. Each cell in your body have copies of your
DNA/chromosomes. The largest chromosome (chromosome 1) has 220 million base pairs.

# Variation in a Species

Natural selection is dependent on the idea of **variation** - any population within a species will
have some genetic variation. What leads to variation?

There's this notion of random mutations within someone's DNA:

    AGTTTAGCG

What could happen is one letter is changed or a strand is missing:

    AG   AGCC

Most of the time, it will either have no effect or kill the organism. Sometime, it'll make the cell
run amok like cancer.

Sexual reproduction is key to variation within a species. Without it, variation would occur too
slowly because each generation would spawn off a clone. With sexual reproduction, there's a
male/female pair.

A child will have 23 chromosomes from its father and 23 from its mother. The combination creates
unique variation for each generation.

The **germ cells** are sperm/eggs which contain the genetic information that are passed on to
children. Germ cells only contain 23 chromosomes as opposed to **somatic cells** which contain 23
pairs. Somatic cells are your body's cells (or everything other than germ cells).

**Homologous** means they're almost the same. It's used to describe chromosomes, as in homologous
pairs. Pairs of chromosomes code for the same gene but may be different alleles.

**Genotype** is exactly which allele you have - or what version of the gene you have. The
**phenotype** is what physical aspect actually occurs. For example, there may be 5 or more genotypes
for curly hair but curly hair is one phenotype.

So when a male's sperm cell is created, how many different combinations are there? There's 2^23,
since there are 23 pairs of chromosome and only one is chosen from each pair through meiosis
(discussed later). When a female's egg cell is created, there are also 2^23 different possible
combinations.

Every couple can produce 2^46 possible combinations. There's also a possibility of DNA recombination
via **crossover**. Chromosome pairs can switch strands of DNA with one another. So for a single pair
- one for your dad and one for your mother - genes may be traded among the individual chromosomes.
This creates even more possibilities for variations.

Sexual reproduction is a useful trait, it allows for quicker evolution and adaptability for a
species. It may be harder to reproduce, but the offspring are more likely to survive.

# Chromosomes, Chromatids, Chromatin, etc.

Khan starts with DNA replication. Both strands of DNA separate and a complementary strand begins to
synthesize for each. Transcription is similar, except the complementary strand is mRNA (uracil and
ribosome intead of thymine and deoxyribosome). This mRNA gets translated into tRNA and proteins.

**Replication** is making copies of DNA from DNA. **Transcription** is making mRNA from DNA.
**Translation** is arranging tRNA using the mRNA.

Some other words that are confusing: chromosome, chromatid, and chromatin.

DNA is a double helix that gets wrapped around proteins called **histones**. Depending on which
stage you are in a cell's life, the DNA forms different structures.

**Chromatin** is the DNA + histone in its natural compact state. This is the structure DNA usually
has during most of the cell's life. It's a good state to be in for the cell to work with.

The homologous **chromosome** is a chain of DNA that's packed tightly. DNA only takes this shape
when the cell is dividing. It's a well defined shape.

When DNA replicates, initially, it's in the chromosome structure. Two strands are formed that are
attached together at a **centrome** point forming an 'X' shape. The entire structure is still called
a chromosome, but each duplicate is called a sister **chromatid**. The chromatid eventually separate
and each becomes its own chromosome.

# Mitosis, Meiosis, and Sexual Reproduction