# Speed Writing For Nonfiction Writers

By Ryan Healy, this is a short guide on how to speed up writing content. Healy offers several
practical tips on the subject. Each tip will increase the speed that you write, but combined they
have a multiplicative effect - Healy calls this the "power" effect.

# Structure

Structure means preparation and planning - create a plan so you know what to write before you sit to
write it. Before you write, make an outline. As you write, use the structure of the outline to fill
in the gaps.

# Process

Follow an established process:

1. Outline
2. Research
3. Write
4. Edit

Don't mix and match any steps in the process. Don't research while you write. If you're missing some
facts, just use a placeholder like question marks or underscores during the writing step. Don't edit
while you write, wait until later on to do the editing for maximum effect. It's best to wait longer
as the length of your text increases.

Healy likes to keep multiple documents related to each step in the process. One document for the
outline, another for research with links to sources, a third for the actual content (which starts
out as a pasted outline), and a fourth for scraps from editing.

# Ideas

Writing is built on good ideas.

When you read, think about how the material can be incorporated into future writing. Do this for
things you read, view, watch, experience, etc... Combine multiple ideas to form new ones. Try new
things to experience more.

# Habit

Adopt positive habits to reinforce your writing goals.

Create a writing schedule. Measure your productivity to determine the best time of the day to write.
Try to do it every day of the week. You need to write during your scheduled time even if you don't
feel like it.

Habits are made of three parts: (1) trigger, (2) routine, (3) reward. The routine is writing.
Trigger is usually time in terms of a schedule. Give yourself a reward when you're done.

# Single-Mindedness

Write when you intend to and do nothing else.

Some tips to stay single minded:

1. Set a goal, like staying focused for 30-60 minutes
2. Work on one project at a time (a book, an article, a white paper, etc...)
3. Batch similar writing projects
4. Favor longer single sessions over multiple smaller sessions because it takes time to start up
   each session

# Focus

Get rid of the interruptions and distractions.

Healy suggests working in an office if you have too many distractions at home. Turn off your cell
phone. Don't use email, RSS readers, social media websites, or instant messenger clients while
you're writing. Another suggestion is to write by hand with a pen and paper.

# Inspiration

Always act immediately on inspiration whenever it happens.

Rearrange your schedule to take advantage of inspiration. It'll be worth the productive session.
Inspiration makes writing easy and effortless. Refuse to write things you don't want to write - it
drains your inspiration and makes it more difficult to write. Write about things that you actually
enjoy. Get regular exercise to get the juices flowing. Manufacture inspiration - do things you
enjoy, listen to things that inspire you, drink and eat.

# Rest

You'll write faster and better with a good night sleep.

Your creativity is aligned with the amount of rest you receive. Rest your mind by getting the full
amount of sleep you need. Either go to bed when you're tired or wake up when you're fully refreshed.
Keep a schedule (or alarm) for the other side of the coin.

# Repurposing

Repurpose previously written content for new content.

When Healy is tasked with writing something new, he checks to see if he has written about it
previously. He then copies/pastes it into a new document and re-writes it to fit. Don't copy/paste
it in its entirety. Instead, use chunks from one or more previous documents to fit into a new one.
It's the difference between starting at 25% vs 0%.

# Deadlines

Use deadlines to enforce quicker schedules.

Your writing will never be finish. Healy relates this to SNL, where the show goes on because the
clock hits 11:30PM and not because the jokes are finished. The jokes will never be finished. You do
your best and you release it.